WHAT HAVE YOU BEEN TOLD HE MIGHT
DO TO YOU?
THAT HE'D TAKE ME OUT IN THE
DESERT AND KILL ME.
Announcer: THURSDAY NIGHT,
MARCH 2, 2006.
IT'S TIME FOR "PRIMETIME."
YOU'RE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY,
SIR.
THIS IS WHAT HAPPENED THE
FIRST TIMEÑi WE VISITED COLORADO
CITY.
WE WERE STOPPED BY THE
POLYGAMIST-RUN POLICE.
DO YOU MIND PUTTING THE
CAMERA DOWN?
PLEASE.
WE'LL LEAVE.
WOULD YOU PLEASE PUT THE
CAMERA --
THEN LAST SUMMER WE RETURNED
WITH THIS WOMAN.
IT'S LIKE COMING INTO A
NIGHTMARE, ANOTHER LIFE.
IT'S LAURENE JESSOP'S FIRST
TRIP HOME SINCE ESCAPING THIS
ISOLATED AND FOR BIDDEN WORLD 18
MONTHS EARLIER.
IT JUST LOOKS DESOLATE.
SHE DOESN'T KNOW WHAT TO
EXPECT.
YOU NERVOUS, LAURENE?
I'M NERVOUS.
WHY?
BECAUSE I WANT TO BE ABLE TO
WALK THROUGH TOWN AND NOT BE
HANDCUFFED, AND IF THE POLICE
OFFICERS DECIDE TO HANDCUFF ME,
WHAT'S TO SAY THEY CAN'T NOW ANY
MORE THAN THEY DID BEFORE?
SHE NEEDS TO PROVE TO HERSELF
THAT THE POLYGAMIST SECT THAT
RUNS THIS TOWN NO LONGER HAS
POWER OVER HER.
PLEASE GO AWAY.
EVERYONE HERE IS TAUGHT FROM
A VERY YOUNG AGE THAT OUTSIDERS
ARE EVIL.
THEY RUN FROM OUR CAMERAS.
THEY WEAR OLD-FASHIONED CLOTHES.
AND THEY FERVENTLY SUBMIT TO THE
RULES OF A MAN THEY CALL THE
PROPHET, WARREN JEFFS.
CAN YOU TELL US WHERE TO FIND
WARREN JEFFS?
JUST GO TO HELL.
JEFFS, A LEADER OF THE
FUNDAMENTALIST CHURCH OF LATTER
DAY SAINTS, IS IN HIDING, WANTED
ON CHARGES OF FORCING UNDERAGE
GIRLS TO MARRY OLDER MEN.
THE FIRST STOP IN LAURENE'S
NERVOUS HOMECOMING IS THE HOUSE
WHERE SHE WAS RAISED, BUT
SOMEONE ELSE LIVES HERE NOW.
HI.
A MOTHER QUICKLY USHERED HER
BROOD INTO THE HOUSE AND DRAWS
THE BLINDS.
GIVES ME THE CHILLS.
HOW BIG WAS YOUR FAMILY?
MY DAD HAD 56 CHILDREN.
HOW MANY WIVES?
FOUR WIVES.
IT WAS AN OPPRESSIVE
CHILDHOOD WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD
COMPLETELY SHUT OUT.
THIS LITTLE PEEK RIGHT HERE
OF THE HOUSE WAS MY BEDROOM AS A
TEENAGER.
THAT WINDOW RIGHT THERE?
UH-HUH.
I REMEMBER ONE TIME LOOKING OUT
THE WINDOW JUST FEELING LIKE I
WAS TRAPPED AND WISHING THAT I
WAS FREE.
A YEAR LATER, AT 19, SHE'S
MARRIED TO VAL JESSOP, AN OLDER
MAN CHOSEN BY THE SECT.
DID YOU KNOW HIM?
MY SISTER WAS MARRIED TO HIM,
AND SO I KNEW HIM A LITTLE BIT.
HOW COULD YOU MARRY A MAN YOU
REALLY DON'T KNOW AND HE HAPPENS
TO BE MARRIED TO YOUR SISTER?
WELL, I ALWAYS FELT LIKE I
WAS AN INTRUDER.
THE PICTURE OF A POLYGAMIST
MARRIAGE, THE PROUD HUSBAND, VAL
JESSOP, WITH HIS WIVES, TWO
SISTERS.
THE FORMER MARIE AND LAURENE
COOK.
THEY HA
LAURENE SAYS MARIE IS BITTERLY
JEALOUS FROM DAY ONE, BEGINNING
WHEN VAL AND LAURENE CONSUMMATE
THEIR MARRIAGE.
WHEN HE HAD SEX WITH YOU, SHE
WAS THERE?
YES.
HE INVITED HER TO OUR BED.
SHE JUST HUGGED HIS BACK, HUGGED
HIM ALL NIGHT THROUGH.
IT WAS VERY STRANGE.
AND PAINFUL.
PAINFUL.
AND I WAS VERY SHY.
I WAS SCARED.
I DIDN'T DARE SAY, LIKE I SHOULD
HAVE, THIS IS OUR WEDDING NIGHT.
WE SHOULD GO TO A MOTEL OR WE
SHOULD HAVE OUR OWN PRIVACY.
WHEN LAURENE FINALLY SPEAKS
UP ABOUT HER SISTER WIFE, VAL
JESSOP CALLS THE SECT POLICE WHO
FORCIBLY REMOVE HER FROM HER
HOME, ALL BECAUSE, SHE SAYS, SHE
DID NOT FOLLOW THE LAW THAT SAYS
PLURAL WIVES MUST OBEY THEIR
HUSBANDS.
IN COLORADO CITY, THE RULES OF
THE SECT ARE ALSO THE LAW OF THE
LAND.
THESE ARE STATE CERTIFIED
POLICEMEN WHO HAVE BEEN ORDERED
BY THE PROPHET OR AN ELDER OR
SOMEBODY TO COME IN THERE AND
ARREST ME.
WERE YOU HANDCUFFED?
YES, I WAS HANDCUFFED, PUT IN
THE POLICE VEHICLE, TAKEN TO THE
INSTITUTION.
FOUR TIMES, THE POLICE TAKE
HER TO A MENTAL INSTITUTION IN
FLAGSTAFF, MORE THAN 200 MILES
AWAY FROM HER CHILDREN.
MY HUSBAND HAD GONE TO THEM
AND I WAS IN REBELLION TO MY
HUSBAND.
I WAS TAUGHT THAT THE ONLY
RIGHTS A WOMAN HAS IS TO BE
OBEDIENT TO HER HUSBAND.
IT'S THE PREVALENT ATTITUDE
CAPTURED IN THE SLOW BEGAN YOU
HEAR THROUGHOUT THIS COMMUNITY.
KEEP SWEET.
THAT MEANS DON'T SHOW ANY
EMOTION, DON'T ROCK THE BOAT,
DON'T MAKE ANY TROUBLE.
LAURENE IS DESPERATE TO
ESCAPE, BUT THERE SEEMS TO BE NO
WAY TO TAKE HER CHILDREN WITH
HER UNTIL SHE MEETS
ANTI-POLYGAMIST ACTIVIST FLORA
JESSOP.
LET'S GO PICK THE KIDS UP.
THEY'RE WAITING FOR US.
HAVING ESCAPED HERSELF AS A
TEENAGER, FLORA NOW RESCUES
OTHERS.
WHEN WE FIRST MEET HER, SHE'S ON
A SECRET MISSION TO HELP TWO
TEENAGE GIRLS ESCAPE UNDER THE
COVER OF NIGHT.
IT'S WITH FLORA'S HELP THAT
LAURENE FINALLY RUNS, FAR AWAY
TO PHOENIX, WHERE SHE FINDS A
SAFE HOME AND WINS CUSTODY OF
HER THREE DAUGHTERS, LUANNE,
JENNIFER AND VALENE, AND SONS
ANTHONY AND THOMAS.
IT'S NOT ONLY THE FEAR OF
LEAVING.
IT'S THE FEAR OF HOW DO I TAKE
CARE OF MY CHILDREN ONCE I'M OUT
THERE.
SO HER LEAVING MAKES HER --
A HERO.
IT MAKES HER A MOTHER.
LAURENE'S RETURN TO COLORADO
CITY ALSO MAKES HER A SURVIVOR.
WHERE ONCE SHE WOULD COWER
BEFORE THE POLICE, DAY SHE
STANDS HER GROUND WHEN WE'RE
CHALLENGED BY A COP.
DO YOU KNOW LAURENE?
DO YOU REMEMBER HER?
YES, I KNOW LAURENE.
DO YOU REMEMBER WHEN SHE WAS
HANDCUFFED AND TAKEN AWAY FROM
HERE?
INSTITUTIONALIZED, HANDCUFFED
BY POLICE OFFICERS.
I DON'T REMEMBER.
YOU HAVE A SHORT MEMORY.
WAS I THERE?
YOU WERE INVOLVED, AND YOUR
FATHER.
HOW DO YOU FEEL RIGHT NOW
INSIDE?
I FEEL EMPOWERED.
I FEEL LIKE I COULD STAND THERE
AND LOOK AT THAT MAN IN THE
EYES.
BUT HER JOURNEY HAS ONLY JUST
BEGUN.
LAURENE CANNOT LEAVE THIS PLACE
FOR GOOD UNTIL SHE FACES THE
DEEPEST SECRETS OF HER LIFE.
AND AS YOU'LL SEE, THERE ARE
OTHER PEOPLE SHE HAS TO LOOK
STRAIGHT IN THE EYES BEFORE SHE
CAN MOVE ON WITH HER LIFE.
THAT'S WHY IN AN ALL NEW CHAPTER
JUST AHEAD, NO ONE WILL BE
PREPARED FOR THE LATEST TWIST IN
HER STORY.
WE COULDN'T BELIEVE IT.
NEITHER WILL YOU, AS WE RE-ENTER
THE WORLD WE'VE BEEN CHRONICLING
FOR OVER TWO YE
Announcer: "PRIMETIME"
CONTINUES WITH JOHN QUIÑONES.
THEY'RE COMPLETELY CUT OFF
FROM THE OUTSIDE WORLD.
THEY WEAR THE CLOTHES OF ANOTHER
CENTURY.
YOUNG GIRLS IN COLORADO CITY
GROW UP KNOWING THEIR FATE,
DESTINED TO BE MARRIED OFF IN
THEIR TEEN YEARS TO OLDER MEN,
EXPECTED TO BEAR MANY CHILDREN
AND OBEY THE STRICT RULES OF
THEIR POLYGAMIST SECT.
THE MEN IN THIS COMMUNITY TRULY
WIELD ALL THE POWER.
ABSOLUTELY.
OVER THEIR WIVES.
OVER THEIR DAUGHTERS.
OVER ALL THEIR CHILDREN.
ABSOLUTELY.
FOR LAURENE JESSOP, AN EVEN
DARKER, MUCH SCARIER FORM OF
INDOCTRINATION BEGINS BEFORE SHE
GETS MARRIED, WHEN SHE'S A YOUNG
GIRL.
THE SEXUAL ABUSE STARTED
HAPPENING WHEN I WAS DEVELOPING.
BY WHOM?
MY DAD.
THERE WOULD BE SEVERAL OF US
GIRLS IN THE ROOM, AND HE WOULD
KISS EACH ONE OF THE GIRLS, PUT
HIS HAND DOWN YOUR BLOUSE, SAY,
OH, LOOKS LIKE YOU'RE GETTING
BIGGER, YOU'RE DEVELOPING,
YOU'RE COMING ALONG VERY WELL
HERE.
HE WOULD GRAB YOUR BREASTS?
YES.
LAURENE AND 12 OF HER SISTERS
REPORTED BEING MOLESTED, THOUGH
THE ABUSE STOPPED SHORT OF
ACTUAL INTERCOURSE.
AND IN 1983, JACK COOKE PLEADED
GUILTY TO SEXUAL ASSAULT AND
WENT TO PRISON FOR FIVE YEARS.
HE TOOK MY VIRTUE, AND I
THINK HE SHOULD HAVE GOT MORE
THAN FIVE YEARS IN PRISON.
WITH HER FATHER IN PRISON,
THE SECT REASSIGNS LAURENE'S
FAMILY TO HER UNCLE.
THAT'S MY MOM.
WHEN MY DAD WENT TO PRISON, MY
FOUR MOMS MARRIED THIS MAN, DICK
COOKE.
AS SHE WALKS TOWARD HER
HOUSE, HER UNCLE AND HER MOM
APPROACH SLOWLY, WARILY.
HI.
WANT TO SAY HI TO ME?
HOW ARE YOU?
HI, I'M GOOD.
GOODNESS, WHY DON'T YOU GUYS
BACK OFF?
HOW LONG HAS IT BEEN?
YOU GUYS, WHY DON'T YOU GUYS
JUST GO.
IT'S A CHILLY REUNION, BUT
LAURENE PUSHES ON.
YOU DIDN'T STAND UP FOR ME
WHEN THEY PUT ME IN THE
INSTITUTION.
YOU KNEW THE TRUTH.
I HAVE NO ARGUMENT WITH YOU.
SHE SAYS HER HUSBAND HAD HER
COMMITTED AND ARRESTED.
DO YOU THINK IT'S RIGHT FOR A
HUSBAND TO DO THAT TO A WIFE?
I THINK I AM THROUGH WITH
THIS CONVERSATION.
THANK YOU.
SHE SAYS SHE WAS ABUSED AS A
LITTLE GIRL.
EVA COOKE HAS HAD ENOUGH OF OUR
QUESTIONS.
SHE RETREATS TO THE HOUSE
UNFAZED, LAURENE CONTINUES TO
CONFRONT HER UNCLE.
I WANT SOME STRAIGHT ANSWERS.
YOU HAVE AS MANY AS I HAVE.
WHY THIS WAS ALLOWED TO GO ON
IN THIS COMMUNITY AND WHY --
WHICH?
THE WAY WOMEN ARE TREATED.
HE STONEWALLS HER QUESTIONS
AND MINE.
MR. COOKE, HOW MANY WIVES DO
YOU HAVE?
NONE OF YOUR BUSINESS.
DO YOU HAVE MORE THAN ONE
WIFE?
NONE OF YOUR BUSINESS.
THAT'S AGAINST THE LAW.
SOON AFTER WE ARRIVE, DICK
COOKE CALLS IN A COMPLAINT.
WE'RE NOT PESTERERS.
THE POLYGAMIST RUN POLICE
FAIL TO SHOW UP, A SIGN THAT THE
GRIP ON COLORADO CITY MAY BE
BEGINNING TO LOOSEN.
ONE REASON THE LOCAL POLICE MAY
BE LOSING THEIR GRIP IS THIS
MAN, AN OUTSIDER SENT IN BY THE
COUNTY ATTORNEY TO DO A JOB THE
LOCAL POLICE WILL NOT DO.
CLEAN UP COLORADO CITY.
I'M SIMPLY HERE TO
INVESTIGATE CRIMINAL ACTIVITY,
AND WHEN YOU'RE LEGALLY MARRIED
AND YOU'RE SPIRITUALLY MARRIED
TO A SECOND WIFE --
OR THIRD OR FOURTH.
OR THIRD OR FOURTH WHO IS
UNDER THE AGE OF 18, IT'S
AGAINST THE LAW.
ENGELS GOT EIGHT MEN TO
SURRENDER AND FACE SEX ABUSE
ALLEGATIONS THAT THEY MARRIED
UNDERAGE GIRLS, CHARGES TO WHICH
THEY PLEADED NOT GUILTY.
WHERE IS WARREN JEFFS?
WELL, WE REALLY DON'T KNOW
RIGHT NOW.
HE TRAVELS WITH BODYGUARDS, AND
I'M SURE THEY'RE PROBABLY ARMED,
AND WHAT THEIR DIRECTIVE IS AND
HOW THEY'LL PROTECT HIM, WE
DON'T KNOW.
JEFFS IS BELIEVED TO HAVE
FLED HIS WALLED COMPOUND IN THE
CENTER OF TOWN.
AT THE GATE, WE DON'T EVEN GET A
CHANCE TO ASK.
YOU BACK OFF.
BACK OFF!
AUTHORITIES BELIEVE HIS
FOLLOWERS WILL DO ANYTHING,
INCLUDING KILL OR DIE, FOR THEIR
PROPHET.
I LOVE HIM WITH ALL MY MIND,
WITH ALL MY HEART, WITH ALL MY
SOUL.
IF HE'S LOCKED UP AND JAILED
AND ARRESTED.
I TELL YOU THIS, HE'S NOT AND
HE NEVER WILL BE.
THEY WON'T BE ABLE TO CATCH
HIM.
THEY WON'T FIND HIM.
YOU HAVEN'T.
THEY WON'T.
I WOULDN'T TELL YOU IF I KNEW.
COLORADO CITY, A TOWN, ITS
LEADER, A CULTURE UNDER AN
UNWELCOMED SPOTLIGHT.
MANY WOMEN, IF THEY KNEW A
DIFFERENCE, THEY WOULD WANT TO
BE OUT OF THERE.
I'VE SEEN THEM STRUGGLE WITH
POLYGAMY.
THEIR HUSBAND COMING HOME WITH A
NEW WIFE.
I'VE SEEN THE NEW WIFE STRUGGLE
TO TRY TO FIT INTO THE FAMILY,
FIND A PLACE, NO PLACE FOR HER
BECAUSE IT'S SOMEBODY ELSE'S
TURF.
LAURENE JESSOP AND HER
CHILDREN BEGIN A NEW LIFE IN
PHOENIX, 400 MILES AWAY FROM HER
HISTORY OF ABUSE AND POLYGAMY,
INSIDE THE EXTREMIST SECT OF
COLORADO CITY, ARIZONA.
I KNOW YOU KNOW THIS.
AFTER A LONG COURT BATTLE,
SHE WON FULL CUSTODY OF HER FIVE
CHILDREN.
SO THIS IS YOUR HOME.
YES, SIR.
MEANWHILE, LAURENE'S
ESTRANGED HUSBAND, VAL, LIVES
ALONE IN AN EMPTYOUSE ON THE
EDGE OF COLORADO CITY.
FOR REASONS HE WON'T DISCUSS,
THE SECT EXCOMMUNICATED HIM AND
TOOK AWAY HIS OTHER WIFE.
BUT MOST OF ALL, HE MISSES HIS
CHILDREN.
YOU WANT THEM BACK.
AND I WANT THEM BACK.
PAINFUL?
PAINFUL.
EXTREMELY PAINFUL.
IN AWARDING CUSTODY OF THE
CHILDREN TO LAURENE, AN ARIZONA
JUDGE CONCLUDED THEIR COLORADO
CITY ENVIRONMENT WAS DOMINATED
BY ABUSE.
ARE YOU A POLYGAMIST?
NO, I'M A SINGLE MAN, ALL BY
MYSELF IN A BIG HOUSE WAITING
FOR MY CHILDREN TO COME HOME.
HOW MANY WIVES?
TWO.
THEY'RE SISTERS.
THAT'S POLYGAMY.
NO, IT'S PLURAL MARRIAGE.
YOU STILL BELIEVE IN PLURAL
MARRIAGE?
I WAS BORN MORMON, OKAY?
ALL RIGHT?
IT'S IN MY BLOOD.
YOU KNOW, I'M NOT GOING TO GO BE
SOMETHING ELSE.
I'M WHO I AM.
VAL JESSOP ADMITS HE WASN'T A
PERFECT HUSBAND AND THAT THINGS
GOT OFF TO A ROCKY START WHEN
LAURENE BECAME HIS JUNIOR WIFE.
SHE TALKED ABOUT THE NIGHT YOU
CONSUMMATED YOUR MARRIAGE.
WAS ANYONE ELSE IN THE ROOM?
THERE'S A LOT OF STORIES,
I'LL TELL YOU.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY TO THAT?
I WOULD SAY ABOUT 2:00 OR
3:00 IN THE MORNING, MARIE CAME
AND SAID CAN I BE WITH YOU?
IT WASN'T RIGHT.
I WAS TOO SOFT-HEARTED TO SAY GO
BACK TO YOUR BEDROOM.
DON'T BOTHER US.
HOW DO YOU GET AN EDUCATION
WITHOUT EXPERIENCE?
HE SAYS HE RAISED HIS
CHILDREN ACCORDING TO HIS
BELIEFS.
HE DENIES ASKING THE POLICE TO
ARREST LAURENE FOR DISOBEYING
HIM.
HE CLAIMS SHE WAS MENTALLY ILL
AND VIOLENT AND THAT HE IS THE
TRUE VICTIM FOR LOSING HIS
CHILDREN.
HE QUESTIONS THE AUTHORITY OF
MAN-MADE LAWS AND THE COURT IN
PHOENIX.
BUT A JUDGE IN PHOENIX HAS RULED
THAT --
A JUDGE IN PHOENIX HAS NO
JURISDICTION.
I'M SORRY?
YOU KNOW, IT'S ALL BULL CRAP.
SUDDENLY, WE'RE INTERRUPTED
BY THAT WOMAN WE MET EARLIER WHO
SEEMS ALMOST DELIRIOUS IN HER
PASSION TO DEFEND HER BELIEFS
AND HER PROPHET.
I'LL TELL YOU SOMETHING ELSE,
I'VE DEFENDED WARREN JEFFS ALL
THE WAY.
BECAUSE IF HE LOSES THIS WAR,
YOU LOSE, TOO.
IF YOU CAN COME INTO A MAN'S
HOME AND TAKE AWAY HIS LAND
BECAUSE THE WAY HE WORSHIPS AND
TEACHES IN HIS CHURCH --
THE ISSUE IS NOT RELIGION.
IT'S THE PLURAL MARRIAGES.
NO, IT AIN'T.
THAT'S BULL [ BEEP ].
THAT'S [ BEEP ].
WE DISCOVER THIS ANGRY WOMAN
IS RUTH COOKE, ONE OF LAURENE'S
55 SIBLINGS.
I HAVE A RIGHT TO WORSHIP ANY
DAMN THING I WANT AND WEAR ANY
CLOTHES I WANT
AND I'M TIRED OF
HEARING HOW STUPID WE ARE.
MY FATHER WAS A FILTHY CHILD
MOLESTER.
HOW MANY OF YOUR DAUGHTERS DO
YOU ADMIT THAT YOU TOUCHED
INAPPROPRIATELY?
I DON'T KNOW.
I CAN'T COUNT THE NUMBER.
JACK COOKE IS NOW 76.
IT'S BEEN 22 YEARS SINCE HE LAST
SAW LAURENE.
BUT AS HE TALKS, HE KNOWS SHE'S
IN A NEARBY ROOM LISTENING TO
HIS EVERY WORD.
I'VE COMMITTED FONDLING AND
TOUCHING MY DAUGHTERS IMPROPERLY
IMPROPERLY, BUT I CLAIM THAT
THEY'RE ON THE SAME PREMISE,
THEY DEPEND ON OUR RELIGION.
HOW COULD ANYONE'S GOD
SANCTION SEXUAL ABUSE OF YOUR
OWN DAUGHTER?
I DIDN'T KNOW IT WAS ABUSE.
I DIDN'T VIEW IT AS ABUSE.
YOU DIDN'T KNOW.
NO.
IT WAS NOT A SEXUAL, SEXUAL
DEAL.
BULL CRAP.
I'LL TELL YOU THIS.
I BELIEVED THAT THOSE CHILDREN
WERE MINE.
I OWNED THEM.
YOU KNEW WE DIDN'T LIKE IT.
I DID NOT THINK IF I SAW MY
DAUGHTERS' BODY OR WHATEVER THAT
THERE'S ANYTHING WRONG WITH IT.
I THOUGHT OF IT MORE AS NO BIG
DEAL.
YOU LOOK AT ANIMALS --
NO, IT'S NO BIG DEAL TO YOU,
YOU [ BEEP ].
IT WASN'T ANY BIG DEAL WITH
ME.
LIKE FARM ANIMALS.
FARM ANIMALS.
IT'S VERY SIMILAR TO FARM
ANIMALS.
LAURENE SITS THERE STUNNED BY
HIS ARROGANCE.
EVERY INTIMACY I HAD WITH
THEM, THEY UNDERSTOOD PERFECTLY
THAT IF I DID ANYTHING THEY
DIDN'T LIKE, TO TELL ME AND I
WOULD NOT DO IT.
YOU TOLD US WE WEREN'T NORMAL
IF WE DIDN'T LIKE IT.
AND THAT ALL THE MEN DO THAT TO
THEIR DAUGHTERS.
I SAID IT WAS CONSENSUAL,
WHATEVER WE WERE DOING.
I WAS NOT IMPOSING ON THEM.
AFTER HEARING HER FATHER'S
STORY, HIS VAGUE MEMORY AND HIS
EXCUSES, LAURENE DECIDES IT'S
TIME TO CONFRONT HIM.
HI.
LET ME FEAST MY EYES ON YOU,
YOU BEAUTIFUL LADY.
HIS GREETING SEEMS HIGHLY
INAPPROPRIATE.
SHE IGNORES IT AND KEEPS HER
DISTANCE.
I HAVE SOME QUESTIONS FOR
YOU.
YOU DO?
OKAY.
YEAH.
SITTING DOWN, SHE NERVOUSLY
REFERS TO SOME NOTES THAT SHE
WROTE IN PREPARATION FOR THIS
MOMENT.
CAN YOU TELL ME IN YOUR OWN
WORDS WHAT YOU DID TO ME
SEXUALLY?
YOU KNOW THAT YOU'RE ONE OF
THOSE FEW THAT I DON'T REMEMBER
HARDLY TOUCHING AT ALL.
I WOULD LIKE TO TELL YOU WHAT
YOU DID TO ME.
OKAY.
YOU MASTURBATED ME MANY
TIMES.
I DID?
AGAINST MY WILL.
NO.
YES.
I DIDN'T EVEN KNOW WHAT YOU WERE
DOING THE FIRST TIME.
I WON'T CALL YOU A LIAR.
I WAS VERY TENDER AGE.
I REMEMBER EVERY SMELL.
I REMEMBER EVERYTHING, EVERY
DETAIL OF IT.
I'M IN SHOCK, BECAUSE --
I'M TELLING YOU --
IF I DID THINGS WITH YOU AND
CAN'T REMEMBER, THEN I MUST HAVE
DONE THINGS WITH OTHER GIRLS
THAT I CAN'T REMEMBER EITHER.
THAT'S RIGHT.
WE WEREN'T SAFE AT HOME.
WE WEREN'T SAFE AT SCHOOL.
IF I WAS WALKING DOWN THE HALL,
YOU'D -- COME HERE, TAKE US INTO
THE LITTLE MAINTENANCE ROOM.
WE WEREN'T SAFE ANYWHERE.
AND WHAT, KISS YOU?
AND --
SEE, THAT'S --
FEEL ME OUT.
TOUCH ME ON MY BREASTS AND MY
PRIVATE PARTS.
OH, THAT'S AWFUL.
ALL I CAN SAY RIGHT NOW, WITH
THESE THINGS HAPPENING TO YOU,
ALL I CAN SAY IS I'M SORRY.
LAURENE SAYS SHE WILL FORGIVE
HIM, BUT SHE CAN NEVER FORGET
HER LOST CHILDHOOD AND ALL THE
OTHER DAMAGE CAUSED BY POLYGAMY.
A YEAR AGO I COULDN'T LOOK AT
THE PICTURES.
I PUT THEM ALL IN A BOX UP IN
THE CLOSET.
I LOOKED AT THEM THE OTHER DAY,
AND, YOU KNOW, I THOUGHT IT'S A
DIFFERENT LIFE.
IT'S A DIFFERENT PART OF ME.
IT'S STRANGE TO THINK THAT I
ACTUALLY LIVED LIKE THAT NOW.
IT'S ONLY A YEAR LATER.
LAURENE'S JOURNEY INTO THE
DARKNESS OF HER PAST IS AS LONG
AND LONELY AS THE HIGHWAY OUT OF
COLORADO CITY, AND IT'S ABOUT TO
TA.
IT'S BEEN NEARLY TWO YEARS
SINCE LAURENE JESSOP ESCAPED THE
HARSH LIFE OF MORMON POLYGAMY IN
COLORADO CITY, ARIZONA, AND SIX
MONTHS AFTER THIS SCENE,
CONFRONTING HER FATHER ABOUT A
CHILDHOOD OF SEXUAL ABUSE.
I WOULD LIKE TO TELL YOU WHAT
YOU DID TO ME.
OKAY.
AND NOW LAURENE SURPRISINGLY
IS READY TO FORGIVE.
I'VE BEEN IN COMMUNICATION
WITH HIM, TALKED SEVERAL
DIFFERENT TIMES TO HIM.
I FEEL COMPLETE FORGIVENESS
TOWARD HIM.
SHE NOW BELIEVES THAT IN
COLORADO CITY, SEXUAL ABUSE OF
CHILDREN WAS ACCEPTED AND
RAMPANT AND THAT HER FATHER WAS
MADE A SCAPEGOAT BY THE
POLYGAMIST SECT.
I WAS OBEYING THE RELIGION BY
WHAT I THOUGHT WERE MY RIGHTS.
HE'S THE ONLY ONE THAT WAS
REALLY HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR WHAT
HE DID.
AND OTHER MEN WERE DOING THE
SAME THING, BUT WHAT IT DID WAS
SHUT THE WOMEN UP, THE GIRLS UP
FROM TELLING, AND I THINK -- I
THINK HE'S PAID THE PRICE FOR
WHAT HE DID.
LAURENE JESSOP HAS COME A
LONG WAY, BUT WHEN WE MET LAST
SUMMER, SHE ALSO ADMITTED TO A
FRIGHTENING INNER CONFLICT AND A
STRANGE FORCE PULLING HER BACK
TO COLORADO CITY AND VAL JESSOP,
THE HUSBAND SHE SHARED WITH
ANOTHER WIFE.
YOU THINK YOU'LL SURVIVE OUT
HERE IN THE REAL WORLD?
I THINK I WILL.
BUT IS THERE A LITTLE PART OF
YOU THAT WANTS TO GO BACK TO
YOUR HUSBAND AND THAT LIFE, THAT
RELIGION?
YEAH, THERE IS.
I THINK THERE ALWAYS WILL BE.
IT'S A LITTLE PART OF ME.
IT'S A LITTLE PART OF MY LIFE.
IN PHOENIX, WITH HER FIVE
CHILDREN, LAURENE FEELS SAFE,
BUT ONE OF HER TWO SONS IS IN
OUTRIGHT REBELLION, DEPRESSED
AND BROODING, ANTHONY STILL
WEARS THE GARB OF THE SECT, EVEN
IN THE STIFLING HEAT.
HE WANTS TO GO HOME, AND HE'S
HAVING ALARMING THOUGHTS.
I'M ALMOST READY TO DO
ANYTHING TO GET BACK TO MY
FATHER.
I'M SICK OF IT HERE.
DID YOU THREATEN TO BLOW UP
THE SCHOOL?
YEAH.
THERE'S NO WAY I COULD DO IT,
THOUGH.
I DON'T HAVE ANY BOMBS.
IN THE MONTHS SINCE THAT
NERVOUS TRIP INTO HER PAST,
COLORADO CITY HAS ONLY GROWN
MORE TENSE.
JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO, WE WERE
ACCOSTED BY THE POLYGAMIST-RUN
POLICE.
TURN THE CAMERA OFF, SIR.
WE'RE NOT TURNING IT OFF.
AND WE HAVE THIS EERIE
ENCOUNTER WITH WARREN JEFFS,
OUTSIDE HIS FOR TRESS-LIKE
COMPOUND.
I'D LIKE TO KNOW WHERE WARREN
JEFFS IS.
HE ANSWERS WITH SILENCE AND A
MENACING STARE.
PLEASE TURN THE CAMERA OFF.
WE'D JUST LIKE TO KNOW IF
HE'S HERE.
I HAVE NO COMMENT.
THAT MAN GAVE YOU A LOOK, AND
IT SAID VOLUMES OF WHAT HE WAS
CAPABLE OF.
JOHN LLEWELAN, WHO HAS
WRITTEN BOOKS FROM HIS
EXPERIENCE, SAYS WARREN JEFFS'
MOST LOYAL FOLLOWERS BELIEVE HIS
PROPHECY OF A FINAL BLOODY
CONFRONTATION WITH THE OUTSIDE
WORLD.
AND THEY WILL USE WHATEVER
VIOLENCE IS NECESSARY TO PROTECT
HIM.
THESE MEN ARE AS DEDICATED AS
SOME OF THESE YOUNG MUSLIM GUYS
THAT TURN THEMSELVES INTO HUMAN
BOMBS.
AND FROM A WOMAN PUSHING A
STROLLER, OMINOUS ADVICE FOR
ANYONE ON THE HUNT FOR HER
PROPHET.
I JUST SAY YOU BETTER BE
CAREFUL.
WOULD SOMEONE HURT PEOPLE WHO
WOULD HURT FOR MR. JEFFS?
OH, NO.
THEY JUST BETTER BE AWARE OF
WRATH OF THE ALMIGHTY.
LAURENE JESSOP TOLD US SHE
WAS TERRIFIED OF THIS PLACE,
DETERMINED NEVER TO COME BACK
HERE AND CERTAINLY NOT BY
HERSELF, AND YET JUST THREE
MONTHS AFTER WE MEET HER, SHE
GETS IN HER CAR ALL ALONE IN
PHOENIX, THEN DRIVES SIX HOURS,
RETURNING TO COLORADO CITY.
AND NOW SHE'S LIVING HERE, IN
THIS HOUSE WITH THE MAN SHE SO
DESPERATELY TRIED TO ESCAPE.
VAL JESSOP.
I WAS REALLY SCARED, BECAUSE
I DIDN'T KNOW, YOU KNOW, HOW VAL
WOULD -- REALLY HOW HE'D BE.
WHAT HAD YOU BEEN TOLD HE
MIGHT DO TO YOU?
THAT HE'D TAKE ME OUT IN THE
DESERT AND KILL ME.
AND WHEN YOU FIRST LAID EYES
ON YOUR FORMER HUSBAND --
I SAW THAT HE WAS MELLOWED,
AND HE WAS NICE TO ME.
AND THE CHILDREN WANTED HIM.
IT WAS SO GOOD TO SEE HER.
SHE WAS SCARED, THOUGH.
LAURENE AGREES TO BRING THE
CHILDREN HOME AS LONG AS VAL
JESSOP PROMISES NOT TO TAKE ANY
ADDITIONAL WIVES.
HE HAS SAID HE WOULDN'T.
IF HE DOES, I'LL LEAVE, IF HE
DECIDES TO MAKE THAT CHOICE, I
WILL LEAVE AGAIN.
I WON'T LIVE IN POLYGAMY AGAIN.
EVEN WHEN THEY COME OUT, THEY
FIND IT DIFFICULT NOT TO BE
DRAWN BACK IN.
YES.
TWO YEARS AFTER HELPING
LAURENE ESCAPE, ANTI-POLYGAMY
ACTIVIST FLORA JESSOP IS NOT
SURPRISED THAT WOMEN WHO ESCAPE
POLYGAMY SOMETIMES GO BACK.
THEY'RE TRYING TO OVERCOME AN
ENTIRE LIFETIME OF INTENSE
CONTROL AND INDOCTRINATION.
TRYING TO SEPARATE THEM FROM
THEIR IDEOLOGIES IS ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE.
YES.
BECAUSE THEY'VE BEEN
BRAINWASHED?
ABSOLUTELY.
GRACIOUS FATHER IN HEAVEN,
THANK YOU FOR THE DAY YOU'VE
GIVEN US.
THE REUNITED JESSOP FAMILY
NOW LIVES IN A RENTED HOUSE JUST
OUTSIDE COLORADO CITY, AND THEY
ALL SEEM VERY HAPPY TO BE BACK
TOGETHER.
ANTHONY, WHO HAD TALKED ABOUT
BLOWING UP HIS SCHOOL IN
PHOENIX, IS TRANSFORMED.
WHEN YOU SEE YOUR DAD HOLDING
YOUR MOTHER'S HAND, WHAT DO YOU
THINK?
IT'S A MIRACLE.
ABSOLUTE MIRACLE THEY'RE HOLDING
HANDS.
MAKES YOU HAPPY?
YEAH, IT'S A MIRACLE.
BUT THIS IS A MAN WHO IS AN
AVOWED POLYGAMIST, A MAN WHO
MARRIED YOUR SISTER, A MAN WHO
HAD YOU ARRESTED, AND YOU WIND
UP BEING COMMITTED FOUR TIMES IN
A MENTAL INSTITUTION.
YES, BUT I DON'T THINK HE'S
GOING TO GO LOOK FOR ANOTHER
WIFE.
YET, WHEN PRESSED, VAL ADMITS
HE STILL BELIEVES THAT THE
FUGITIVE SECT LEADER, WARREN
JEFFS, IS THE ONE TRUE PROPHET
OF GOD.
AND WHEN IT COMES TO PLURAL
MARRIAGES --
I DON'T HAVE THE OPTION.
IT WON'T HAPPEN.
IT'S NOT REVEALED TO ME.
HOW WOULD IT BE REVEALED TO
YOU?
THROUGH THE LEGITIMATE
AUTHORITY AS SPOKEN IN SECTION
132 OF THE DOCTRINE.
THE PROPHET.
YES.
IF VAL JESSOP'S INTENTIONS
SEEM UNCERTAIN, LAURENE SAYS
SHE'LL TAKE HER CHANCES AND STAY
AS LONG AS SHE'S THE ONE AND
ONLY WOMAN OF THIS HOUSE.
AND YOU'VE FORGIVEN HIM.
I'VE FORGIVEN HIM.
I KNOW THE LORD LOVES US.
AND THE CHILDREN.
AND HE WANTS US TO BE A FAMILY.
I MISS HER.
I THINK SHE'S TRYING TO FIND HER
WAY, AND I HOPE THAT SHE CAN
WITHOUT -- WITHOUT IT COSTING
HER HER CHILDREN OR HERSELF.
BUT YOU WILL NOT LIVE LIFE
THE OLD WAYS.
NO.
AND YOU UNDERSTAND THAT.
YES.
IT'S TOO MUCH PAIN THAT WAY.
Announcer: "PRIMETIME"
CONTINUES.
NOW WE MAKE 180-DEGREE TURN
TO WHAT MIGHT BE CALLED A MORE
MODERN POLYGAMIST COMMUNITY.
IT'S THE IDEA BEHIND A NEW HBO
SERIES "BIG LOVE," ABOUT A MAN
WITH THREE WIVES BEING
ENCOURAGED TO TAKE A FOURTH.
JUST HANDLING THESE THREE,
THAT'S A FULL-TIME JOB.
VAL, COME TO BED.
VAL!
THAT, OF COURSE, IS FICTION,
BUT HERE'S THE REALITY.
A MANSION WE WERE INVITED TO
WHERE WE MET OVER A DOZEN WIVES,
COUNTLESS CHILDREN, AND JUST ONE
MAN IN THE SHADOWS, LITERALLY.
* O BEAUTIFUL FOR SPACIOUS
SKIES *
IT SEEMS SO PATRIOTIC,
STRAINS OF A STIRRING ANTHEM SET
AGAINST A BACKDROP OF CLASSIC
AMERICAN SCENERY.
* ABOVE THE FRUITED PLAIN *
BUT THE WOMEN IN THIS CHOIR
IN CENTENNIAL PARK, ARIZONA, ARE
NOT ONLY SINGING PRAISES TO
AMERICA THE BEAUTIFUL.
THEY'RE ALSO PLEDGING THEIR
DIE-HARD ALLEGIANCE TO POLYGAMY.
HOW MANY OF YOU BELIEVE THAT A
PLURAL MARRIAGE IS YOUR
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT?
THIS IS NOT EXACTLY YOUR
MOTHER'S TUPPERWARE PARTY.
EVERY ONE OF THESE WOMEN LIVES
IN A HOUSEHOLD WITH ONE HUSBAND
AND ANYWHERE FROM TWO TO A DOZEN
OR MORE WOMEN THEY CALL SISTER
WIVES.
FOR US, IT WORKS BECAUSE WE
LOVE IT.
WE WANT IT TO WORK.
FOR THE MOST PART, THESE SEEM
LIKE TYPICAL LAW-ABIDING,
GOD-FEARING AMERICANS, TEACHERS,
NURSES, BUSINESS WOMEN.
THEY'RE MODERN, SAVVY, AND IF
YOU ASK THEM LIBERATED.
TAKE LINDA EARLE, FOR INSTANCE.
I'M INDEPENDENT.
I DON'T WANT TO HAVE TO DOTE ON
A GUY EVERY NIGHT.
I DON'T WANT TO HAVE TO MAKE
SURE HE HAS A MEAL EVERY NIGHT.
LET SOMEBODY ELSE DO IT WHO
LIKES IT.
IN LINDA'S HOUSE, THERE'S
ROOM FOR MANY WIVES.
SHE LIVES IN THIS
MULTI-MILLION-DOLLAR
MEGAMANSION.
THERE ARE THREE MASSIVE WINGS IN
THE HOME TOTALING 30,000 SQUARE
FEET.
THE HOUSE IS IMMACULATE.
CHECK OUT THE DINING ROOM.
WITH ALL THE KIDS, HOW DO YOU
KEEP IT LIKE THIS?
A LOT OF HELP.
THE KITCHEN.
THE FORMAL KITCHEN.
MASSIVE.
YOU SAY YOU LIKE IT BECAUSE YOU
DON'T HAVE TO COOK.
I DON'T HAVE TO COOK.
TWO SEPARATE BARS.
TWO MICROWAVES.
THEN THERE'S THE EVERYDAY
KITCHEN.
FOUR REFRIGERATORS.
THE SIZE OF THE CAFETERIA.
AFTER ALL, THERE ARE DOZENS OF
OF MOUTHS TO FEED HERE FROM
NEWBORNS TO TEENAGERS.
YOU'VE GOT TO GET TO SCHOOL.
THEY CLAIM THEY DON'T KNOW
HOW MANY CHILDREN LIVE HERE
BECAUSE THEY'RE AFRAID THE
AUTHORITIES MIGHT INVESTIGATE
AND PERHAPS BREAK UP THE FAMILY.
THAT'S WHY THERE'S ONLY ONE
OFFICIAL WIFE HERE IN THE EYES
OF THE LAW.
THE OTHERS ARE SANCTIONED ONLY
BY THE SECT.
YOU WOULD WANT TO BE IN A
MARRIAGE WHERE THERE WOULD BE
OTHER WIVES, SISTER WIVES?
YEAH, THEY'RE YOU'RE SISTERS.
YOU WORK TOGETHER.
YOU GENUINELY CARE ABOUT EACH
OTHER.
BUT WITH SO MANY WOMEN AND
ONLY ONE MAN, WE HAD TO ASK.
DOESN'T ONE SISTER WIFE EVER GET
JEALOUS OF ANOTHER?
JEALOUSY DOESN'T MATTER.
WHEN IT COMES TO A SITUATION
WHERE HE HAS COMMITTED TO THAT
WOMAN ALSO.
THE WOMAN WHO HAS HER
HUSBAND'S SEXUAL PARTNERS AT
BREAKFAST WITH HER THE NEXT
MORNING, SHE KNOWS WHERE HER
HUSBAND HAS BEEN.
SHE KNOWS THE CHILDREN THAT HAVE
COME FROM THIS UNION, SHE LOVES
THOSE CHILDREN, SHE LOVES THAT
WOMAN.
WHAT IF A SISTER WIFE IS
YOUNGER, PRETTIER?
GOOD FOR HIM.
[ LAUGHTER ]
[ APPLAUSE ]
YOU CAN'T HELP BUT WONDER
ABOUT INTIMACY, SEX.
IT MUST TAKE SOME AMOUNT OF
VIAGRA FOR THIS MAN TO BE ABLE
TO --
THIS IS A RESPONSIBILITY
THESE MEN TAKE.
THIS IS SERIOUS.
THIS IS NOT CASUAL --
SEX.
-- SEX IN ANY WAY.
SO WHO IS THE MAN OF THIS
HOUSE?
WELL, HE'S AN EXTREMELY WEALTHY
BUSINESSMAN WHO'S CONCERNED THAT
IF HE SPEAKS PUBLICLY, IT COULD
CAUSE HIM BOTH LEGAL AND
FINANCIAL HARM.
SO HE DEMANDS ANONYMITY TO
PRESERVE, HE SAYS, HIS RIGHT TO
PRIVACY.
HOW MANY WIVES DO YOU HAVE?
LET'S JUST SAY I BELIEVE THAT
MULTIPLE RELATIONSHIPS IS
SUPERIOR TO A SINGLE
RELATIONSHIP.
IT IS MORE COMPATIBLE TO THE
NEEDS OF THE MAN.
IT'S MORE COMPATIBLE TO THE
NEEDS OF THE LADIES.
HOW MANY CHILDREN HAVE YOU
FATHERED?
HE WON'T DISCUSS NUMBERS, BUT
A RELATIVE TELLS "PRIMETIME"
THAT THIS MAN HAS AS MANY AS 15
WIVES AND PERHAPS 75 CHILDREN.
IS THE SEX EVER OVERWHELMING?
DON'T INSULT ME.
WE ARE SERIOUS AND COMMITTED TO
THE LIFESTYLE CHOICES WE'VE
MADE, AND WE'RE HONORABLE IN
THEM.
THIS IS NOT ONE BIG RAUCOUS
SEX PARTY.
NO, I THINK YOU'RE CONFUSING
ME WITH MR. HEFNER DOWN IN LOS
ANGELES.
THERE ARE MUCH CHEAPER WAYS TO
HAVE SEX THAN TO MAINTAIN A
PLURAL HOUSEHOLD.
ISN'T THIS JUST THE ULTIMATE
IN ONE MAN HAVING HIS WAY WITH
SO MANY WOMEN FOR PERSONAL
GRATITUDE?
THAT WOULD SHOW A GREAT DEAL
OF IGNORANCE.
IT REQUIRES AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT
OF EFFORT TO MAINTAIN ANY
RELATIONSHIP.
TRY MAINTAINING TWO
RELATIONSHIPS OR THREE
RELATIONSHIPS.
IT REQUIRES SUBSTANTIAL EFFORT.
WHY DO YOU THINK THE OUTSIDE
WORLD VIEWS THIS WITH SUCH
DISMAY, DISGUST?
I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S POSSIBLY JUST THE
DIFFERENCE.
I HAVE A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF
DISGUST FOR MONOGAMY AND TOTAL
DISGUST FOR BACHELORHOOD.
WHEN THERE'S NEED FOR A
ROMANTIC ENCOUNTER WITH YOUR
HUSBAND, HOW DO YOU SCHEDULE
THAT?
IT'S NEVER AN ISSUE OF
SCHEDULING.
YOU FIND OUT THERE ARE LADIES
THAT HAVE NEEDS THAT MIGHT BE A
LITTLE MORE IMPORTANT THAN YOUR
NEED, ESPECIALLY IF A YOUNG LADY
IS TRYING TO HAVE A CHILD.
I'M UNWILLING TO RESTRICT WHO
I LOVE, AND IF I HAVE TO CHOOSE
BETWEEN LOVING SARAH VERSUS
LOVING DOROTHY, I RESENT IT, SO
I WILL MAKE THEM THE SAME OFFER.
AND IF THEY WANT TO PARTICIPATE,
THEY CAN.
IF THEY DON'T, THEY DON'T NEED
TO.
BUT NO WOMAN IS GOING TO TELL ME
I CAN'T LOVE ANOTHER WOMAN.
THERE'S A WAY OUT IF A WIFE
DOESN'T WANT TO BE THERE?
AS CLOSE AS YOUR CAR KEYS.
IS THIS POLYGAMY?
POLYGAMY HAS AN UGLY TONE TO
IT.
THIS IS A LIFESTYLE THAT WORKS
FOR SOME OF US VERY NICELY.
AS HARD AS IT MIGHT BE FOR
THE REST OF THE COUNTRY TO
UNDERSTAND, THE ONE THING YOU
CANNOT DENY ABOUT THE WOMEN OF
CENTENNIAL PARK IS THEIR
PASSION.
I WOULD LIKE TO SAY I REALLY
DO LOVE THE WAY I LIVE.
AND I FEEL VERY PROUD, VERY
HONORED TO KNOW EACH AND EVERY
MEMBER WITHIN MY HOUSEHOLD.
I WANT TO LIVE THIS WAY FOR THE
REST OF MY LIFE AND FOR THE REST
OF ETERNITY.
INTERVIEWS DAVID STRATHAIRN.